

--- PAGE 1 ---

Names: Team Number: 
MEEN 305 – Project
Design, build, and test of a topology optimized lightweight beam 
Due April 26, 2026 by 11:59 PM 
Project is a team assignment on the application of the deformation and failure analysis 
concepts to design and structural optimization of a beam.  
BACKGROUND AND  MOTIVATION – Many human-made  structures  utilize beams with 
sophisticated topologies and cross-sections, see below.  Additionally, many animals have bones  with 
similarly complex shapes, see the jawbone of the below badger skull.  


--- PAGE 2 ---

Names: Team Number: 
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS – You are tasked to design a lightweight horizontal beam (see sketch 
in Fig. 1). 
Figure 1. Sketch of a lightweight beam (frontal view) 
• The goal is to minimize the use of materials while meeting the safety requirements against
failures. You will fabricate your design via 3D printing.
• You need to design the shape of your beam, including the cross -section type (solid circular,
rectangular, H, I, T, square tube, circular tube, etc.), taper (i.e. ℎ(𝑥), 𝑏(𝑥), 𝑑𝑖(𝑥), 𝑑𝑜(𝑥), 𝑏𝑓(𝑥),
𝑡𝑤(𝑥), 𝑒𝑡𝑐. ), and any other weight reducing elements (e.g. holes). You will need to justify your
choices using von Mises stress analysis.
• The total length of the beam must 9”.
• The span between the two supports is 𝐿 = 8".
• The beam must be designed to support the following loading conditions:
• Loading 1: A concentrated load of 5 lb is applied at the midspan.
• Loading 2: The 5 lb load is removed. Your beam is then rotated 90° onto its side. Next, a
concentrated load of (2 +  𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑚 #) lb applied at (2 +  
𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑚 #
2  ) inches from support A.
• The design factor of safety is 1.5 for all possible failure modes.
ANALYSIS REQUIREMENTS 
• You need to write a computer program that automatically solves the statics problem for a simply
supported beam subject to a single concentrated applied load between the supports. The program
needs to calculate reaction forces and automatically generate plots of the shear force diagram 𝑉𝑦(𝑥)
and bending moment diagram 𝑀𝑧(𝑥). The units of the plots must be clearly labeled as well as the
name or symbol of the independent and dependent variables being plotted. The user inputs to the
program must be the span, load magnitude, and load location.
• The program must also take the basic tapered geometric dimensions of the beam as input, e.g. (i.e.
ℎ(𝑥), 𝑏(𝑥), 𝑑𝑖(𝑥), 𝑑𝑜(𝑥), 𝑏𝑓(𝑥), 𝑡𝑤(𝑥), 𝑒𝑡𝑐. ). The program must compute and automatically plot
the section modulus 𝑆(𝑥) and second moment of area 𝐼𝑧(𝑥) with appropriate units labeled. The
program should also automatically plot the outer dimensions of cross -section viewed from the
front (𝑥 − 𝑦 plane) and top (𝑥 − 𝑧 plane).
• The relevant material properties must be a user input into the program.
• The program must compute and automatically plot von Mises stress 𝜎𝑣𝑚(𝑥) and factor of safety
𝐹𝑜𝑆(𝑥).
• The program must compute and automatically plot vertical deflections 𝑣(𝑥).
• The program must compute and automatically plot slope deflections 𝜃𝑧(𝑥) = 𝑣′(𝑥).
x 
y 
z 

--- PAGE 3 ---

Names: Team Number: 
• Your program should automatically calculate the weight of the beam. You can  neglect the weight
of the beam  in your analysis , but you must justify this assumption and ensure that it is clearly
commented in the program.
• The computer program can be written in any language you like, including Python, MATLAB, or
Excel.
• You should use your program to optimize your beam’s topology and geometric cross -sectional
design. This will involve a LOT of trail -and-error. If you’d prefer to avoid the trial -and-error
approach, then you can alternatively use appropriate parameterization of the dimensions combined
with built -in optimization tools. For example, if you are designing the height of a rectangular
shaped beam, you can parameterize this as ℎ(𝑥) = 𝐻𝐿/2 × (
𝑥
𝐿/2)
𝑛
. With this parameterization, you
could ask the built-in optimizing tool (e.g. Goal Seek in Excel) to minimize the standard deviation
of 𝜎𝑣𝑚(𝑥) by changing 𝑛. The standard deviation will go to zero when 𝜎𝑣𝑚(𝑥) is constant with
respect to 𝑥. Once you are happy with your value of 𝑛, you can optimize 𝐻𝐿/2 by asking the built
in tools to find the value of 𝐻𝐿/2 that outputs a minimum factor of safety of 1.5.
• Lastly, you should use your engineering judgement and intuition to constrain unrealistic designs
that are artifacts of the idealized analysis. For example, the beam’s cross -section CANNOT taper
to zero at the supports, even if the idealized analysis says i t can. The thickness of a tubular cross -
section CANNOT be paper-thin, even if the idealized analysis says it can.
• At minimum, you should try at least 20 design iterations that meet all design requirements. Of
those 20 design iterations, a subset of them should be ruled out based on your engineering
judgement of their designs being unphysical. Of the remaining design i teration, the “best” or
“optimal” design is the one with the minimum weight.
BUILD REQUIREMENTS 
• You should develop a CAD model of your final “optimized” beam design.
• This CAD model is then used  to 3D print  your “optimized” beam using a polymer-based
material. You can select any of the materials available at the MEEN Rapid Prototyping Lab. You
can also use other facilities, e.g., FEDC in Zachry Complex, Soft Mater, etc., to 3D print your
design. Make sure you justify the material selection.  You should consider cost, mass density,
printability, and mechanical properties in your material selection.
• You need to document the printing process in terms of printing orientation, infill density, etc., and
whether additional support structures are needed. You need to discuss any fabrication challenges
and material/dimensional imperfections you may encounter during the fabrication . Also, discuss
any final refinement that is done. If possible, please include photographs of the fabrication process.
TESTING REQUIREMENTS 
• You need to record a video of you r team demonstrating the load-bearing capacity of your beam
under the two above loading conditions.
• For each loading condition, measure and calculate the deformation. A horizontal string or
background grid paper can be used as a baseline to measure deflections from.
• The supports should each be 8” apart and at least 0.5” wide.
• If you have access to a 5-gallon bucket, that is the ideal way to apply the load. Fill the bucket with
the necessary amount of water to produce the desired load. Then hang the bucket from your beam.
Hint: Do this outside in case your beam fails.

--- PAGE 4 ---

Names: Team Number: 
BASIS FOR GRADE - Your team's grade will be based on the accuracy and detail of your analysis , 
design rationale and justification,  fabrication process, and demonstration of load bearing ability of 
your beam design. The goal is to minimize the use of materials and structural weight while meeting all 
other design requirements. You will need to submit a project report with the following information: 
• Report should be typed and nicely formatted, e.g. title page, page numbers, section headers,
equation numbers, table/figure numbers, figure/table captions, etc.
• Report should have a one paragraph abstract followed by the following sections:
1. Design Requirements
2. Theory and Analysis
3. Build
4. Test
5. Discussion
6. Author Contributions
7. Appendix – Design Iterations
• In the Design Requirements section, list the specific requirements for your team and FBD.
• In the Theory and Analysis section, type out the key equations and their key assumptions.
Briefly explain their implementation/parameterization in your program and built-in tools used.
• Detailed engineering drawings of your final “optimized” beam design, e.g. from SolidWorks.
• Provide a brief (few sentences) justification for why you chose your final geometric design and
the rationale for your material selection. Put this in the Build section.
• Provide detailed documentation of your 3D printing fabrication strategies, including rationale
and justification of selecting printing factors. You can also include a discussion on fabrication
challenges you encountered. Put this in the Build section. No other text needed.
• Upload your test demonstration video as well as a short tutorial video on how to use your
computer program to YouTube and include the link in the Test section of the  report. This
can be public private link only accessible to the instructor and graders. You may include video
of the build process, but it is NOT required. Make sure to get approval before recording in
any of the rapid prototyping labs. No other text needed in the Test section of the report.
• In the Discussion section, provide a table with a comparison of the theoretically predicted
and experimentally measured values of the beam’s weight and maximum deflection under both
loading conditions. Include the percent error between theory and experiment. Provide a brief
discussion (about a paragraph or two) of the sources of error in the theory (e.g. assumptions,
neglecting weight of beam, linear elasticity) and sources of experimental error (e.g. load
inaccuracies, measurement error, dimensional tolerances exceeded, etc.).
• Provide at least 20 screenshots of your 20 design iterations. No need to format these nicely.
Just drop them into the Appendix section. No need to have Figure labels, captions, or text
for these. Include a table of the predicted beam’s weight for each of the 20 design iterations.
• In the Author Contributions section, describe the tasks and responsibilities of each member
and the work coordination among all members of your team.
• Only one team member will upload the report and your program on behalf of the entire team.
• Each team member must complete an individual peer assessment form (provided on the next
page) and upload to CANVAS.
PEER ASSESSMENT  - Be sure to balance the workload of this project evenly among team 
members. After the project is completed, an individual peer assessment (only visible to instructors and 
graders) will be completed by the student to voice praises or concerns about project contributions 
from their fellow teammates. 

--- PAGE 5 ---

Names: Team Number: 
Student Self and Peer Evaluation for MEEN 305 Project 
This form will be used to assess the performance of all the members of your group. Your responses 
are to be confidential and only known by the graders and yourself. Do not discuss your responses 
with your group members. Type your team number in place of “#
”. 
TEAM: #
Based on the following scale, fill in the number of points earned by each group member for each 
category using the following scale: 
5 – Excellent 4 – Good 3 – Fair 2 – Poor 1 – Did Nothing 
Team Member 
Name 
Assisted 
with 
analysis 
Assisted 
with 
fabrication 
Assisted 
with 
testing 
Assisted 
with writing 
the report 
Completed the 
assigned tasks 
that were given 
by group 
Actively 
responded to 
group 
communications Total 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
If you have any additional comments that were not addressed in the table, write them here. This is 
an additional opportunity to respectfully voice praises or concerns about your group members. 
When finished, please edit the name of this document by replacing the “ #” with your team 
number. Save and submit to CANVAS. 